Croup, or laryngotracheobronchitis, is a
common
pediatric upper airway condition that
every respiratory therapist needs to recognize quickly.
It's typically caused by a viral
infection, most often parainfluenza,
and it leads to inflammation and swelling
in the larynx and trachea,
especially in the subglottic region.
Because children have naturally smaller
airways, even a small amount
of swelling can significantly increase
airway resistance.
This is why CRUPE presents with that
classic triad, a
barking cough, hoarseness, and inspiratory
stridor.
And that stridor is key.
It tells you this is an upper airway
problem, not
a lower airway issue like asthma.
From an RT perspective, your priority is
not just identifying
Croup, it's determining severity.
A child with just a barking cough and no
stridor at rest is likely
Once you hear stridor at rest, see
retractions,
or notice agitation, you're dealing with
at least moderate disease.
And if that child becomes fatigued,
hypoxic,
or less responsive, that's a red flag for
impending respiratory
failure.
One of the most important concepts in
Croup management is minimizing agitation.
Crying increases airflow demand and
worsens airway narrowing, so keeping
the child calm is critical.
Often, that means allowing them to stay
with a and
avoiding unnecessary procedures.
Treatment typically includes
corticosteroids like dexamethasone to reduce inflammation and nebulized epinephrine for moderate
to severe cases.
Epinephrine works quickly by causing
vasoconstriction, which temporarily reduces airway
swelling, but remember its effects can
wear off.
That's why monitoring after treatment is
essential.
As an RT, you'll also support oxygenation,
assess work of breathing, listen for
changes in air movement,
and monitor for rebound symptoms.
And always keep your differential in mind.
Drooling, toxic appearance, or sudden
onset
should make you think about more serious
conditions like epiglottitis or foreign body aspiration.
Bottom line, Croup is an upper airway
emergency spectrum.
Your job is to recognize where the patient
falls on that spectrum,
intervene appropriately, and escalate
early if things worsen.